Data Analysis and Visualization of Healthcare Dataset

Project Overview
This project focuses on analyzing a healthcare dataset using Python and visualizing key aspects such as age distribution, gender distribution, diagnosis, and patient outcomes. The goal is to gain insights into the dataset, understand the distribution of various features, and draw conclusions based on the visualized data.

Requirements
To run this project, ensure that the following libraries are installed in your Python environment:

pandas
matplotlib
seaborn

You can install the required libraries using:

pip install pandas matplotlib seaborn

Dataset
The dataset used in this project is healthcare_data.csv, which contains anonymized information about patients, including:

Age: Age of the patient
Gender: Gender of the patient (e.g., Male, Female)
Diagnosis: Patient's diagnosis or condition
Outcome: The outcome of the diagnosis (e.g., Recovered, Deceased)

Ensure that the dataset is in the same directory as the Python script for it to be read correctly.

Steps Performed
  Data Loading: The healthcare dataset is loaded using pandas.

  Initial Data Exploration:
    Display of the first few rows of the dataset.
    General information about the dataset, including column types and missing values.
    Summary statistics for each column (numerical and categorical).

Data Visualization:
  Age Distribution: A histogram with a kernel density estimate (KDE) shows the distribution of patient ages.
  Gender Distribution: A bar plot visualizing the number of male and female patients in the dataset.
  Outcome Distribution: A bar plot depicting the distribution of patient outcomes.
  Diagnosis vs. Outcome: A comparison of patient diagnoses against outcomes using a grouped bar plot.

Key Features
  Descriptive Statistics: Summarizes basic statistics about the dataset (mean, median, standard deviation, etc.).

  Distribution Analysis: Provides visual representations of age, gender, and outcome distributions.

  Diagnosis and Outcome Comparison: Visualizes the relationship between patient diagnosis and outcomes.

How to Run the Project
Place the healthcare_data.csv in the same directory as the script.

Clone the repository:

  git clone https://github.com/abdul-ta/Data-Analysis-and-Visualization-of-Healthcare-Dataset.git

  
Run the Python script using:

    python healthcare_analysis.py

The output will display both statistical information and visualizations in pop-up windows.

Results and Insights
  Age Distribution: The dataset provides insights into the age range of patients, highlighting key demographics.
  Gender and Outcome Distribution: The distribution of outcomes based on gender helps in understanding potential correlations between gender and recovery rates.
  Diagnosis and Outcome: Shows how different diagnoses impact the likelihood of different outcomes.

Project Structure

- healthcare_analysis.py        # Main Python script for data analysis and visualization
- healthcare_data.csv           # Dataset (CSV file)

Conclusion

This project demonstrates the power of Python in data analysis and visualization, allowing for an in-depth examination of healthcare datasets. The visualizations provide a clear picture of the data distribution and key relationships, offering valuable insights for healthcare data analysis.
